Background

'1984,' written by George Orwell, takes place in an imagined future when much of the world has fallen victim to perpetual war, omnipresent government surveillance, historical negationism, and propaganda. Great Britain, known as Airstrip One, has become a province of a superstate named Oceania that is ruled by the Party. They employ the Thought Police to persecute individuality and independent thinking. Big Brother, the leader of the Party, enjoys an intense cult of personality despite the fact that he may not exist. The protagonist, Winston Smith, is a diligent and skillful rank-and-file worker and Party member who secretly hates the Party and dreams of rebellion.

Main Characters

Winston Smith: the protagonist who's your typical guy and is curious of the past before the Party.

Julia: Winston's partner in crime. Another rebel, but in a different way. She's less concerned with the how and why of the Party and more concerned with the "doing things that aren't allowed without getting caught."

O'Brien: a man (that works in the same ministry as Winston) that Winston feels a connection with. From the beginning of the book, Winston is convinced that O'Brien is the same as him -- secretly hating of the party.

The Party/Big Brother

In the mid 1950s, Britain fell into civil war before the English Socialist Party, abbreviated as Ingsoc, emerged victorious and formed a totalitarian government in Britain. Ingsoc became the sole government party in this new nation. The Party manipulates historical records, claims credit for inventions, and moniters all the Party members through a telescreen. Posters of the Party leader, Big Brother, dominate the city. Each poster is captioned "BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU," and Winston describes these posters as the type whose eyes follow you as you walk by them.

Newspeak

To meet the ideological requirements of Ingsoc, the Party created a controlled language of heavily-restricted grammar and vocabulary, called Newspeak. It is meant to limit the freedom of thought: personal identity, self-expression, and free will. These threaten the ideology of the régime of Big Brother and the Party, who have criminalised such concepts into thoughtcrime, as contradictions of Ingsoc orthodoxy. (add that example from Winston's work)

Doublethink

Doublethink is the act of simultaneously accepting two mutually contradictory beliefs as correct, often in distinct social contexts. It is notable due to a lack of cognitive dissonance—thus the person is completely unaware of any conflict or contradiction. While it could be partly a product of Big Brother's formal brainwashing programs, the novel explicitly shows people learning to doublethink due to peer pressure and a desire to gain status within the Party. It is explained in the novel as so:

 "Applied to an opponent, it means the habit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of the plain facts. Applied to a Party member, it means a loyal willingness to say that black is white when Party discipline demands this. But it means also the ability to believe that black is white, and more, to know that black is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contrary. This demands a continuous alteration of the past, made possible by the system of thought which really embraces all the rest, and which is known in Newspeak as doublethink," (Part II, Chapter IX).

